[Music]
welcome to topcast
episode 50 the big 5-0 if you're
listening to this on audio anyway
on youtube i'm not sure what episode i'm
up to but i do know
that we're doing chapter 16 of the
beginning of infinity today
the evolution of creativity and we're in
our third part the third and
final part today and so let's just get
into it
after just recapping what was happening
in the last episode
and we're talking about the evolution of
creativity we're talking about
memes and how memes come into existence
and how the capacity for
meme evolution occurs and david is
comparing what goes on with
animals who are able to imitate parrots
who parrot
apes who ate for example if either of
these animals were listening to a
lecture of some sort
then they would be able to repeat some
of the content but it's not because they
would have exactly acquired the memes
themselves in other words
acquired the meaning of the ideas but
instead they'd just be repeating
the noises if in the case of a parrot so
if this parrot is say
listening to a lecturer what david goes
on to say
quote is suppose that the lecturer had
repeatedly returned to a certain key
idea and had expressed it with different
words and gestures each time
the parrots or apes job would be that
much harder than imitating
only the first instance the students
much
easier because to a human observer each
different way of putting the idea would
convey
additional knowledge pause there just my
reflection so
this is an important insight about one
of the
other categorical differences between
humans and other animals
a parrot that repeats what they've heard
at a lecture hasn't understood anything
so they don't acquire
the meaning the meme that's actually
there but of course
a person may you know there are
situations where for example
a person might simply learn by wrote the
content of a lesson or a lecture
and thereby haven't really acquired the
meme as such they haven't acquired the
meaning behind the idea
but they may be able to verbatim quote
the words
this isn't how learning typically
happens with people
as david has just said there if a
lecturer was to
repeat the same idea over and again but
using different words
using a different approach each time
it'd be that much harder for a parrot to
parrot
what they're saying because a parrot
only imitates the same thing
over and over again but a student would
probably find it
easier easier because each different way
of explaining
the same concept contains additional
knowledge and i suppose this is just
sort of a
meta comment on that a lot of people
have learned papa
from david deutsch because he has
repackaged re-explained improved in
certain ways
what popper has said through the fabric
of reality and the beginning of infinity
and so people have been able to
pick up those memes that otherwise would
have been elusive to them
poppa does famously write with great
clarity
in comparison to other philosophers i
should hasten to add
but despite that high level of clarity
just with the passage of time
language changes problem situations
change and
so therefore a modern philosopher like
david deutsch who
re-explains what popper is saying is
sometimes a better avenue
into understanding those ideas than the
original philosopher let's say
also just on this philosophy of
education thing that's kind of behind
this
short section that i've read from the
beginning of infinity just there
it really points to something about the
differences
among teachers and you can think back to
teachers that you had
at either school or university and it
illuminates this idea that there is such
a thing as
good teaching or good explaining you
know feynman richard feinman was
famous for being good at explaining
difficult
physics concepts and the best
teachers of course have a variety of
different ways
at least two of explaining something if
they only have one well then they're not
a particularly good teacher are they
they
might very well understand it themselves
they might be able to regurgitate that
explanation for someone else
but if that explanation doesn't really
suit
the situation that you're in the kind of
knowledge that you have at that
particular time or the problem situation
you find yourself in
then of course you might not be able to
pick it up as easily
as some other teacher who might have
exactly the same kind of knowledge and
be able to pass it on
in a way that suits you better people
talk about learning styles and that kind
of thing it's really just
what your background knowledge happens
to be at that particular time
there are certainly some teachers out
there who teach by the textbook
in both school and university from my
recollection anyway
and these people are kind of an
impediment to learning
they don't really assist because they're
kind of just getting in the way of the
textbook you may as well just read the
textbook if all they're going to do is
to
simply cleave very closely to what the
text happens to say
on the other hand if they can refer you
to the text
and then explain sections of the text in
a way that
speaks to you a little bit more clearly
then all the better and if they have
three or four such approaches to
explaining then
all the better still and if they can
make it entertaining and funny then you
really have one of those rare teachers
that can inspire your learning in a
particular area
and also help you with your particular
problem situation of wanting to find out
how the world works in that particular
area that you happen to be interested in
but if they're dry and they're just
saying on page 62
here's what it says or certainly when i
what i remember at school is we had
people who would put up
overhead projector things and then they
would just read off a projector i had
one of these in like
second year physics at uni uh
learning relativity and this lecturer
would just
project the lesson uh onto the screen
and literally read the uh overhead
projection
screens it was terrible i mean it's
terrible but you know at the same
university i had some absolutely
brilliant lectures and and the funny
thing was and this shows you how
individual
learning happens to be one of my
favorite lecturers
was basically one of the most
disorganized as well would arrive
to the class just seemingly not knowing
where we were up to exactly
would have a hazy idea would never
really refer to the official curriculum
as it was published
and would would often fill us in on
their own particular area of obscure
research
it would seem obscure but of course in
order to understand the problem they
were trying to solve they would then go
and explain
all the foundational things that were
beneath this particular problem all the
knowledge that one needed in order to
come at this problem from different
angles
and so by the end of the lecture we
would have a great understanding of this
particular
niche area of knowledge this this area
of specialty that this particular
lecturer was interested in and that was
the
great part about of course going to
university is you have these specialists
there working on very
particular fundamental foundational or
specialized problems that you need
expert knowledge in order to try and
tackle
to some extent you need expert knowledge
and so they would be able to lift you up
to their
um to to where they were at to the
amount of knowledge they had
by explaining what the problem was and
all the things beneath that problem that
had led to that problem and so
this was the kind of lecturer i
absolutely loved
and i remember at a lunch break one time
having a discussion with fellow students
about this and there were other students
there who yes
agreed that this particular lecture was
fantastic because they were
funny and engaging and went off topic
and talked about tangent went up on
tangents and gave anecdotes and it was
just
all and all the stuff that was related
but not necessarily
central to the official curriculum and
this was precisely the thing that other
people in the class
couldn't stand and would say that
lecturer is my least favorite of all
because they're disorganized and they go
off topic
i just want to learn what's in the
official curriculum
so that i know what to study for the
assessments for the exams
so that i can pass the exams and get
good marks and of course this
illustrates a
great difficulty with that style of
education anyway having classes of that
kind
but i guess in a free market where
people
are going to choose amongst universities
the only solution i can think of and i
don't know what the solution otherwise
to this would be
is to have those two approaches there
the
kind of style where a student wants to
go along and learn
from an expert in an entertaining way to
sit there and listen to the lecture kind
of like a ted talk kind of thing where
you're actually able to interact
one-on-one with the person giving the
ted talk
and to talk about all of the questions
you might have that the lecture itself
doesn't particularly answer
that's an ideal kind of learning i would
suggest
or there might be other people whose
style of learning is just
i want to know what the official
curriculum is so that i can get
credentialed so that i can pass the exam
and get the certificate to hang on the
wall to say that i have this particular
degree or whatever
then maybe universities could offer
these two different sorts or maybe
lecturers could advertise themselves as
a being of one of these two different
extremes or somewhere in the middle
so you'd know what you're getting but of
course at the moment at university or of
course at school
you don't know what you're getting you
can't really pick well there's there's
an extent to which of course you can
pick you can
look at the list of lectures and the
list of subjects and then pick that way
but sometimes maybe you like the
lecturer but not the subject or vice
versa so this is a great challenge for
universities i don't know what the
solution is but i know it's certainly a
challenge at the moment because the only
reason
for the continued existence of that kind
of university thing is because of this
whole idea of
credentialing of getting someone an
official degree to say that you are now
officially qualified in this particular
area even though your
level of understanding of that area
might be quite poor
because if you are that kind of student
that just wants to learn the knowledge
required to pass the exams then
really the best idea is to simply
practice exam
questions over and over and over again
until you become proficient at answering
exam
questions which might not be a very good
indication of what's happening in the
real world when you actually have to
solve
a problem in other words a thing no one
knows the answer to
rather than just a puzzle which is a
question in an exam for example that
someone already knows the answer to
and you have to come up with the correct
answer rather than the best possible
answer
given all of the unknowns which is what
reality
and finding stuff out in science and
various other areas of knowledge is
in fact all about okay whatever the case
that was an extremely long diversion
about something
barely related to this chapter
so let's go back to the chapter just to
recap we've got a parrot
and we have a student listening to a
lecturer and
david is explaining the difference
between
how they both acquire the capacity to
repeat what the lecture is saying
whether word by word or the actual
meaning
of the the lesson that lecturer is
delivering david writes quote
alternatively suppose that the lecturer
had consistently misspoken in a way that
altered the meaning
and had then made one correction at the
end the parrot
would copy the wrong version the student
would not
even if the lecturer had never corrected
the error at all
a human listener might still have a good
chance of understanding the idea that
was in the lecturer's mind
and again without imitating any
behaviour if someone else reported the
lecture
but in a way that contained severe
misconceptions
a human listener might still be able to
detect what the lecturer meant
by explaining the reporters
misconceptions as well as the lecturer's
intention
just as a conjuring expert might be able
to detect
what really happened during a trick
given only a false account
from the audience of what they saw
rather than imitating behavior
a human being tries to explain it to
understand the ideas that caused it
which is a special case of the general
human objective of explaining the world
when we succeed in explaining someone's
behavior and we approve of the
underlying intention
we may subsequently behave like that
person in the relevant sense
but if we disapprove we might behave
unlike that person
since creating explanations is second
nature or other first nature to us
we can easily misconstrue the process of
acquiring a meme as
imitating what we see using our
explanations we
see right through the behaviour to the
meaning
parrots copy distinctive sounds apes
copy purposeful movements of a certain
limited class
but humans do not especially copy any
behavior
they use conjecture criticism and
experiment to create good explanations
of the meaning of things
other people's behavior their own and
that of the world in general
this is what creativity does and if we
end up behaving like other people
it is because we have rediscovered the
same
idea okay i'm skipping a little and then
david goes on to a subsection which is
titled
both puzzles have the same solution and
he writes
in this chapter i have presented two
puzzles the first
is why human creativity was
evolutionarily
advantageous at a time when there was
almost no innovation
the second is how human memes can
possibly be replicated given that they
have content
that the recipient never observes i
think that both these puzzles have the
same solution
what replicates human means is
creativity
and creativity was used while it was
evolving to replicate memes
in other words it was used to acquire
existing knowledge
not to create new knowledge but the
mechanism to do both things is identical
and so in acquiring the ability to do
the former we automatically become
able to do the latter it was a momentous
example of reach
which made possible everything that is
uniquely human
pausing there my reflection on that and
dave is going to get into this in the
very next paragraph but just to
emphasize what's being said here
the ability to acquire
means human creativity
enables us to acquire memes existing
knowledge things that are
already known to the populace to other
people
to the culture and so on so creativity
allows us to replicate
those names the existing knowledge and
maintain a tradition to a large extent
however
that same capacity to create
to create to recreate the memes to
replicate the memes
also gave us the ability to create new
knowledge that no one had ever had
before so that's a really interesting
capacity of the human mind a unique
capacity of the human mind
and as we'll get into a capacity that is
universal in its ability to create
knowledge in other words
whatever knowledge can be created can be
created
by us explanatory knowledge
next paragraph david says quote a person
acquiring a meme
faces the same logical challenge as a
scientist
both must discover a hidden explanation
for the former
it is an idea in the minds of other
people for the latter irregularity or
law of nature
neither person has direct access to this
explanation but both have access to
evidence
with which explanations can be tested
the observed behavior of people who hold
the meme
and physical phenomena conforming to the
law the puzzle of how one can possibly
translate behavior back into a theory
that contains its meaning as therefore
the same puzzle
as where scientific knowledge comes from
and the idea that memes are copied by
imitating their holders behavior
is the same mistake as empiricism or
inductivism or marxism
they all depend on there being a way of
automatically translating problems
like the problem of planetary motions or
how to reach leaves on tall trees
or be invisible to one's prey into their
solutions
in other words they assume that the
environment in the form of an observed
phenomenon
or a tall tree say can instruct minds or
genomes in how to meet its challenges
then david goes on to quote poppa and
popper wrote
quote the inductivist or lamarckian
approach operates
with the idea of instruction from
without or from the environment
but the critical or darwinian approach
only allows instruction
from within from within the structure
itself
i contend that there is no such thing as
instruction from without the structure
we do not discover new facts or new
effects by copying them or by inferring
them inductively from observation
or by any other method of instruction by
the environment
we use rather the method of trial in the
elimination of error
as ernst gombrich says making comes
before matching
the active production of a new trial
structure comes before its exposure to
eliminating tests
that's from the myth of the framework
then david goes on to say
papa could just as well have written we
do not acquire new memes by copying them
or by inferring them inductively from
observation
or by any other method of imitation or
instruction by the environment
the transmission of human type means
memes whose meaning is not mostly
predefined within the receiver
cannot be other than a creative activity
on the part of the receiver
memes like scientific theories are not
derived from anything
they are created afresh by the recipient
they are conjectural
explanations which are then subjected to
criticism
and testing before being tentatively
adopted this same pattern of creative
conjecture
criticism and testing generates
inexplicit as well as explicit ideas
in fact all creativity does for no idea
can be represented entirely explicitly
when we make an explicit conjecture it
has an inexplicit component
whether we are aware of it or not and so
does all criticism
pause there just my reflection on that
i've often been
asked in my uh having done
this for a while now explaining aspects
of the beginning of infinity
why it is we'll never get a final theory
of
such and such usually it's physics why
can't we get to the final fundamental
theory of physics okay and one response
is
that i often give like for example you
know people talk about well
what is the physical theory that might
unite general
relativity and quantum theory
people are trying string theory people
are trying various other approaches as
well
string theory is probably the most
famous example of one although it's not
one theory
there are many different forms of string
theory when you look into it
i don't fully i don't claim to
understand string theory
however what i would say about that is
that even if it were successful it
couldn't be a
final theory of physics it wouldn't be
the last
word on physics there would always still
be more to know
even at the foundations because you
would always be able to ask
why is string theory why does string
theory have the form that it does there
will be unknowns there in the same way
that the
the laws of physics that we have now
have some
really deep questions about the my
favorite kind of question about
the form that the laws of physics take
uh
the constants of nature where did these
concepts of nature come from
why do they have the values that they
have um you know the the the universal
gravitational constant that appears in
not only newton's law of gravity it
appears in general relativity
as well okay big g which is something
like 6.67 times 10 to the power of minus
11.
don't worry about what the units are
anyway this this number the value of
this okay because you can you can
actually change the number if you change
what the units are
ignoring that complication this number
tells you something about the strength
of gravity
not just here on earth but throughout
the universe
okay there is this number here on earth
9.81 which is the
acceleration the local acceleration due
to gravity here near the surface of the
earth
at sea level and so on and so forth okay
that number easily changes if you change
your location
around the solar system and around the
universe that will change depending upon
what cosmological body you happen to be
standing on at any particular time and
how high you are
all that aside the universal
gravitational constant is universal it
applies everywhere throughout the entire
universe and the question is why does it
have the value that it has
why is it that strong and not stronger
or weaker
and many this is the fine-tuning problem
and if we go back
through my episodes of beginning
infinity there is a section there there
is one of the episodes there is on
fine tuning i'll put that up on the
screen for you if you're interested
more about this it's certainly been a
great fascination of mine having
taken on astronomy looking into all of
these different concepts of nature
another one is simply the the mass of
the electron
um or how how strongly the strong force
couples together the protons in a
nucleus okay all of these
constants of nature come together such
that we have a really interesting
universe we have
life in the universe now there is no
physical law that
gives us those numbers that is able to
predict what those numbers are going to
be
those numbers are empirically known you
have to
measure them you have to use scientific
apparatus you have to go into a
laboratory
and actually figure out what these um
numbers are in the case of
g the universal gravitational there's
many ways you can measure so the famous
one
is is the cavendish experiment cavendish
experiment was
done in the 1700s i think something like
that and um
it's basically the purpose of it is to
find g and this is how we know g we have
to go out there into the universe and to
use physical objects and find out what
these things are
so it doesn't come from a theory so
there must be a deeper theory we
most you know scientists physicists
think well this is a this is a question
this is an open scientific question
why is it that value and not something
else and so far there's
kind of two approaches neither of which
i don't think anyone believes one is
well the universe has been designed this
way
so there's a god or a simulation which
has
selected those particular values so that
conscious observers can be here and
wonder about that question
the other is that there is a
megaverse there is a multiverse of
multiverses okay a higher order of
multiverse we're not talking about the
quantum multiverse
but rather a multiverse where every
single possible logically possible
physical law
or something like that exists out there
somewhere or other
and some of those selections
happen to have when you when you put
together those
constants of nature in just the right
way we'll end up producing
interesting chemistry and complicated
life
like ourselves so that could be a
solution or you don't even need
all the possible physical laws you just
need a multitude of them you need
enough of them such that at least one of
them
will produce us okay and so here we are
to wonder about it because it's actually
all the different sorts of physical laws
with all the different values of these
constants of nature
are out there somewhere most of which
don't have life and we happen to be in
the one
or few that do have life and so that
could be a solution
now these two solutions are poor
right because they they they raise more
questions than they answer where are
these other universes how can we
experimentally detect these other
universes at the moment it seems like
those other universes
are basically the same category as god
may as well believe in god they're both
metaphysical claims so i happen to think
and i think a lot of other scientists
think as well
is that well we don't yet know the
theory it's kind of like we're at the
position
prior to when darwin came up with
evolution by natural selection
prior to that it was unimaginable to
people
that the appearance of design could
arise without a designer
okay so paley's famous comment about the
watch you pick up the watch in the field
somewhere other
you assume by looking at the intricate
workings of its mechanism
that therefore there must be a creator a
designer a builder behind this watch
that you find
so then shouldn't it be the case that
the human eye
or the eyes of mammals and fish and
birds
this is an even more intricate device of
a kind a more
intricate thing that has appeared in
nature so therefore if you're assuming
that the watch
has a watchmaker you should definitely
assume that
life has a life maker and therefore god
exists that kind of thing
so people couldn't conceive of a way in
which design could just arise
it would otherwise seem like magic if
you could say a watch just
naturally appears according to acting
under deterministic physical laws
then this seems astounding it seems like
there has to be a watchmaker
but of course now we know in now we know
of
evolution by natural selection we know
that over time
life fills these niches and these niches
get filled with
organisms that are fit in that
particular niche
and if one goes extinct then a new one
will arise and have features that
may be more or less different depending
upon how much the environment has
changed over time
so on and so forth we know about
neo-darwinism evolution by natural
selection
it was a theory prior to which people
just couldn't conceive of how it would
be possible for this kind of thing to
happen
now actually there is a third way in
which
people talk about these concepts of
nature and one of them is and this is i
think lee
smolden's idea you can look up lee small
and lisa mullen talks about an
evolutionary cosmology where
um black holes have this
reverse side to them where there's like
a white hole and out of the white hole
comes a new big bang
and a new universe and these universes
that are produced have slightly
different constants of nature and
there's this evolutionary process
whereby the universes that proliferate
tend to be more similar to the ones that
they have come from so these universes
are giving birth via this black hole
mechanism
that is you know wherever you find a
black hole then that's a portal to
another universe
so the theory goes kind of thing i don't
really haven't looked into too much of
the details
but that universe that you go into once
you've gone through the black hole
then has properties somewhat similar to
the universe that we're in right now
but the concepts of nature are ever so
slightly changed and so in this way you
can have this
evolutionary proliferation of universes
perhaps beginning with ours perhaps not
beginning with ours whatever the case
some of those universes that are birthed
from black hole events will have
conditions such that life will arise but
not all of them okay so this is a
kind of a third approach but it's not a
new mode of explanation really is it
it's the same
kind of explanation as evolution by
natural selection so
in david deutsch's terminology what we
really want is a new mode of explanation
that would be my guess a new mode of
explanation
will give us the explanation of why the
constants of nature
have the values that they do and it's a
something that we can't
imagine just at the moment we could
someone out there is going to come up
with the answer to this
okay so they can imagine it i can't
imagine what it will be
um if you have any ideas um perhaps
comment
i've never asked for people to comment
in the youtube comments before
perhaps comment in the youtube comments
okay tell me what your
explanation for why the concepts of
nature are the way they are
don't mention god don't mention the
super mega verse and don't mention
evolution by natural selection see if
you can come up with a new mode of
explanation that no one's ever
heard of before because um that could be
nobel prize winning time science
but that that long diversion is
really off track is just to say that um
we don't yet have a final theory of
physics we never will because of that
reason now
because we can we will need to know what
those constants mates are and
whether or not string theory can give us
that i don't know
whatever the case the other approach to
this why we can't have a
final theory of physics or anything else
is as david says there
quote he says when we make an explicit
conjecture
string theory would be an explicit
conjecture as with general relativity
any scientific theory it has an
inexplicit component whether we are
aware of it or not
and so does all criticism so this
inexplicit
component of a theory is always there
and can be made
more explicit over time but you can
never get rid of it
all together but the inexplicit
component
is something that needs further
explanation that
is kind of it's not that it's unknown in
any
complete sense but it does mean that you
aren't there at the final theory
because you've got certain things that
you can't explicitly
explain and surely a final theory would
be
perfectly explicit if it's not perfectly
explicit then someone can always say
what do you mean by this particular
thing
so you can't get to the end you can't
get the final answer because there is
always
inexplicit content no matter what the
idea happens to be
and just to tie this up into a neat
little bow even if we did have the final
theory of physics or the final theory of
everything
we couldn't possibly know that i don't
think there can be a final
theory of physics for the reasons i said
because you can always ask
why is that the final theory does that
final theory tell you why it's the final
theory
and if so why can't we ask the question
about why that explanation of why it's
the final theory
is in fact true okay so we can always
ask the deeper question about
how do you know that why is that the
case and so on
anyway back to the book and david writes
thus as has so often happened in the
history of universality
the human capacity for universal
explanation did not evolve to have a
universal function it evolves simply to
increase the volume
of mimetic information that our
ancestors could acquire
and the speed and accuracy with which
they could acquire it
but since the easiest way for evolution
to do that
was to give us a universal ability to
explain through creativity
that is what it did this epistemological
fact
provides not only the solution of the
two puzzles i mentioned above
but also the reason for the evolution of
human creativity
and therefore the human species in the
first place
it must have happened something like
this in early pre-human societies there
are only very simple means
the kind that apes now have though
perhaps with a wider repertoire of
copyable elementary behaviours
those memes were about practical things
like how to get food that was otherwise
inaccessible
the value of such knowledge must have
been high so this created a ready-made
niche
for any adaptation that would reduce the
effort required to replicate memes
creativity was the ultimate adaptation
to fill that niche
as it increased further adaptations
co-evolved
such as an increase in memory capacity
to store more memes
finer motor control and specialized
brain structures for dealing with
language
as a result the mean bandwidth the
amount of memetic information that could
be passed from each generation to the
next
increased too memes also became more
complex and sophisticated
this is why and how our species evolved
and why it evolved rapidly at first
memes gradually came to dominate our
ancestors behavior
meme evolution took place and like all
evolution
this was always in the direction of
greater faithfulness
this meant becoming ever more
anti-rational at some point
meme evolution achieved static societies
presumably they were tribes consequently
all those increases in creativity never
produced streams of innovations
innovation remained imperceptibly slow
even as the capacity for it was
increasing rapidly
even in a static society memes still
evolve
due to imperceptible errors of
replication they just evolve more slowly
than anyone can notice
imperceptible errors cannot be
suppressed they would generally evolve
towards greater fidelity of replication
as usual with evolution and hence to
greater staticity
of the society pause there my reflection
so if you're in an ancient tribe
in fact a really really ancient tribe
day prehistoric ancient tribe you know
you're
coexisting you're alongside sort of
neanderthals
then you're using tools and the way in
which you're able to
use a tool is because memes have been
passed on within the culture where you
find yourself
and perhaps making these tools is part
of a
ritual so it might serve a dual purpose
if you make a spear
ever more sharp then you are adhering to
the culture's memes
ever better and so you can't be accused
of
not trying to enact the memes of the
society so you won't be cast out
similarly making the spear ever sharper
is going to actually have practical use
and so there's going to be this dual
reason why
greater statisticity of memes
the greater statisticity in the society
can result in very gradual evolutionary
change of the memes
but nothing creative actually being done
so the ever sharper spear
might actually have some practical
benefits but
if you are required only to ever make
ever sharper spears then you will never
innovate
to make a bow and arrow or make anything
else better that might be actually
better
for capturing animals when you go
hunting
and so your tribal ancient static
society
is at real risk of going extinct
it can remain static for a very long
period of time
but as soon as the problem comes along
which requires
creativity in order to solve you are
singularly
and all the members of your tribe are
singularly unable to do anything about
it even though you have a creative
capacity because the creative capacity
is latent in a way
and you're not using it sorry about the
traffic noise
back to the book and david writes status
in such a society
is reduced by transgressing people's
expectations of proper behaviour
and is improved by meeting them there
would have been the expectations of
parents priests
chiefs and potential mates or whoever
controlled mating in that society
who would themselves conforming to the
wishes and expectations of the society
at large those people's opinions would
determine one's ability to eat
thrive and reproduce and hence the fate
of one's genes
pause there just reflecting on that and
that's like an
aha moment at least it should be if
you're encountering this for the first
time
so if a
human type creature
or very early humans let's say who are
evolving
the capacity to replicate memes
over time then those
early people who are who have got
certain genes which allow for them to
replicate memes
then the ones who are able to replicate
memes
more faithfully are the ones who eat
thrive and reproduce
and so therefore their genes for the
ability to replicate memes
are being passed on to their children
okay and so the ability to replicate
memes then becomes
there's a selection pressure on that
there's a niche to be filled
there and we're going to come to niches
in just a moment
but i might just flag the fact that uh
in a recent
top cast not really related uh
much to the beginning of infinity just
more of a personal reflection of mine on
the possibility of alien life out there
i mentioned various
arguments and one of the arguments i
mentioned
because these are just wild speculations
for the most part no one
knows much about the possibility of
alien life
you know whether the biology will be the
same as ours or different to ours and so
on and so forth
but one of the arguments uh from an
academic called charlie lineweaver
is that it's assumed there's an
intelligence niche
but if we look at the history of life on
earth it appears as though this
intelligent
niche has only arisen once and maybe
that is just a very fortuitous
happenstance occurrence and we shouldn't
expect it to ever happen again
maybe the intelligence niche doesn't
actually appear out there
in the universe anywhere even if there
is life teeming
throughout many planets in the universe
because
for a long time here on earth there
wasn't really an intelligence niche to
be filled
because there was no intelligence
anywhere um the intelligence niche is
there is
once it's filled by intelligence anyway
that's slightly off topic let's go back
to the book
and david writes but how does one
discover the wishes and expectations of
other people
they might issue commands but they could
never specify every detail of what they
expected
let alone every detail of how to achieve
it when one is commanded to do something
or expect it to as a condition for being
considered worthy of food or mating for
example
one might remember seeing an already
respected person doing the same thing
and one might try to emulate that person
to do that effectively one would have to
understand what the point of doing it
was
and to try to achieve that as best one
could
one would impress one's chief priest
parent or potential mate by replicating
and following their standards of what
one should strive for
one would impress the tribe as a whole
by replicating their idea
all the ideas of the most influential
among them of what was worthy
and acting accordingly hence
paradoxically
it requires creativity to thrive in a
static society
creativity that enables one to be less
innovative than other people
and that is how primitive static
societies which contain pitifully little
knowledge
and existed only by suppressing
innovation constituted environments that
strongly favor the evolution
of an ever greater ability to innovate
from the perspective of those
hypothetical extraterrestrials
observing our ancestors a community of
advanced apes with memes
before the evolution of creativity began
would have looked superficially similar
to their descendants after the jump to
universality the latter would merely
have had more memes
but the mechanism keeping those memes
replicating faithfully
would have changed profoundly the
animals of the earlier community
would have been relying on their lack of
creativity to replicate their names
the people despite living in a static
society would be relying entirely
on their creativity pause there my
reflection so
what's he said there well so there has
been a jump to universality
there there was a species of
human-like but not human human-like ape
that had memes but no creativity
then a species arose human
that did have creativity and i say human
because here we can just use it as a
kind of synonym for people people being
universal explainers
people being able to create explanations
and people being able to form models in
their mind
of anything in the universe anything
that's out there in the universe we can
come to understand
insofar as other animals and other
species of ape
can form models at all of the world
around them
then it's only of their local
environment and of the things that the
genes might have coded
the means that they have for okay maybe
my cat as it wanders around the house
has a model of the house
it's like a visual image or a map
something like that it knows how to get
around
but the cat has absolutely no capacity
whatsoever
to form a model like the standard model
of particle physics
or a model of what an economic system is
all about
okay so we can do that because we are
universal explainers it doesn't matter
what the phenomena
is in reality
we can develop an explanation of it and
sort of a model of it
whereas insofar as other creatures are
able to build models at all in their
minds and they must be able to build
models
of some kind there is a finite
repertoire
the cat would probably reach a limit
of being able to find its way around the
physical environment once the physical
environment got too large and this is
probably why
creatures like cats don't tend to wander
too far from their homes
that even if the cat is allowed to go
outside it tends to stay within a fairly
um short radius of wherever its actual
house is and wherever the food is
probably because it would
it understands or its genes understand
that if it goes any further it gets
lost it's probably it's it's ram
and its little brain quickly gets filled
up
anyway so the point is that prior to
whatever the first universal explainer
was you had apes that
relied on memes and then you had
universal explainers that relied on
creativity however
superficially these two creatures would
have seemed exactly the same
because the memes would have been
precisely the same the content of the
memes would have been the same it's just
that in the second case
now the possibility for an infinite
growth of knowledge
existed there was in that creature it
was able to explain actually explain
stuff and create new memes
whereas uh the the previous one only had
a finite repertoire
of memes they could change but only very
very slowly and not about anything at
all
just about the kind of things that
happened to be in its genes okay
let's go back to the book and david
writes as with all jumps to universality
the way in which the jump emerged out of
a gradual change is interesting to think
about
creativity is a property of software as
i
said we could be running ai programs on
our laptop computers today
if we knew how to write or evolve such
programs
like all software it would require the
computer to have certain hardware
specifications in order to be
able to process the required amount of
data in the required time
it so happened that the hardware
specifications that would make
creativity practicable
were included in those that were being
heavily favored for pre-creative meme
replication
the principal one would have been memory
capacity the more one could remember
the more memes one could enact and the
more accurately one could enact them
but there may have also been hardware
abilities such as mirror neurons for
imitating a wider range of elementary
actions
than apes could ape for instance the
elementary sounds of a language
it would have been natural for such
hardware assistance for language
abilities to be evolving at the same
time as the increased
mean bandwidth so by the time creativity
was evolving
there would already have been
significant co-evolution between genes
and
memes genes evolving hardware to support
more and better memes
and memes evolving to take over ever
more of what had previously been genetic
functions
such as choice of mate and methods of
eating fighting and so on
therefore my speculation is that the
creativity program is not entirely
inborn it is a combination of genes and
memes
the hardware of the human brain would
have been capable of being creative
and sentient conscious and all those
other things long before
any creative program existed considering
a sequence of brains during this period
the earliest ones capable of supporting
creativity would have required
very ingenious programming to fit the
capacity
into the barely suitable hardware as the
hardware improved
creativity could have been programmed
more easily until the moment when it
became easy enough
actually to be done by evolution we do
not know
what was being gradually increased in
that approach to a universal explainer
if it did we could program one tomorrow
just pause there just um my reflection
on the part where
david writes that speculates that the
creativity program is not entirely
inborn
a combination of genes and memes what
this what this doesn't
mean is that therefore creativity
of the human kind necessarily requires
the wet wear of a brain a particular
kind of hardware no that's not the case
you'll still be able to physically it
has to be the case
that we can put the creative algorithm
whatever it is
into a silicon computer why must that be
the case because of the universality of
computation
that any physical process david deutsch
proved this remember
and in fact it kind of goes back to
turing as well alan turing
any physical process can be
modeled as a computation so whatever the
physical thing is that's happening
you can write a computer algorithm in
principle to capture that
for only a certain number of things have
we actually ever done that
um of course okay we can model you know
how cars work therefore we have car
computer games we can model how an
airplane works therefore we have
uh aircraft simulators um how the
planets move
we can do modeling of how the motion of
the solar system
but we haven't written the program for a
a a person
for a human yet but it's a physical
process
whatever the brain is doing is physical
so therefore that can be done inside a
computer so
it's possible and it's provably possible
i should say
all right back to the book and this
section is titled the future of
creativity
and i'm i'm skipping the first page or
so of
this particular section and i'm jumping
in where it says
not only is creativity necessary for
human meme
replication it is also sufficient deaf
people and blind people and paralyzed
people are still able to acquire and
create human ideas
to a more or less full extent hence
neither walking upright
nor fine motor control nor the ability
to pass sounds into words or any of
those other adaptations
though they might have played a role
historically in creating the conditions
for human evolution
were functionally necessary to allow
humans to become creative
nor therefore are they philosophically
significant in understanding what humans
are today
namely people creative universal
explainers pause there my reflection
this is
a profound discovery in philosophy by
david deutch
i do not know of any criticisms i
haven't actually heard any criticisms of
this by the way
from people who understand it at least
that this is
human nature this is an explanation of
human nature you know it's been a
millennial long search for what it is
that separates
people from other creatures
it's not you know people have talked
about souls people have talked about oh
is it our ability to be moral
is it um our ability to think about
aesthetics and
science okay all of these attempts have
kind of been
circling or aspects of this
fundamental explanation namely that we
are universal explain explainers
universal explainers back to the book
david writes
it was specifically creativity that made
the difference between april
memes expensive in terms of the time and
effort required to replicate them
and inherently limited in the knowledge
that they were capable of expressing
and human memes which are efficiently
transmitted and universal in their
expressive power the beginning of
creativity
was in that sense the beginning of
infinity
we have no way of telling at present how
likely it was for creativity to begin to
evolve in apes
but once it began to there would
automatically have been an evolutionary
pressure for it to continue
and for other meme facilitating
adaptations to follow in its wake
this increase must have continued
through all
the static societies of prehistory okay
just pause there and
we're nearly at the final um paragraph
but
that's really cool there and again this
kind of
is sympathetic to the sentiment i
expressed
about line weaver and that other top
cast episode
about life out there in the universe are
we alone
where david has written here he said
quote we have no way of telling at
present how likely it was for creativity
to begin to evolve in apes
that's of fundamental importance to this
question about
the possibility of alien life out there
it could be the case that creativity
really does evolve okay frequently
it crops up whenever life crops up
there is this question that i raised in
that episode about well how come it only
happened once if it's so easy
okay if the probability of it or the
likelihood
of it arising in apes or anywhere else
is high
then why didn't it happen more than once
um how likely is it for apes to appear
are apes necessary
could lizards you know evolve into
intelligent creatures okay you see this
in science fiction type movies right
in certain computer games where you have
intelligent lizards or intelligent cats
and so on
you know that that assumes a kind of
lamarcism or a kind of direction to
evolution
and specifically it assumes that
intelligence is this convergent feature
of evolution
which it doesn't appear there's any
evidence for whatsoever
unlike the existence of the the eye
which keeps on cropping up in
lots of different species or wings crop
up in lots of different species as well
brains that are able to do mathematics
in the way that we can and write poetry
and the way that we can
appear to have arisen only once
creativity appears to have risen only
once but we don't know how likely it was
david sits out here that here so it
could be really likely it's just that
earth life on earth has been unlucky in
a sense
and perhaps out there there's lots of
other different kinds of universal
explainers
or not perhaps it it arose once and
that's it throughout the universe by the
way
and for some of the mathematical
arguments on that you see that episode
anyway
final paragraph let's uh begin that
david writes the horror of static
societies
which i described in the previous
chapter can now be seen as a hideous
practical joke
that the universe played on the human
species our creativity which evolved in
order to increase the amount of
knowledge that we could use
and which would immediately have been
capable of producing an endless stream
of useful innovations as well
was from the outset prevented from doing
so by the very knowledge
the memes that creativity preserved
the strivings of individuals to better
themselves were from the outset
perverted
by a superhumanly evil mechanism that
turned their efforts to exactly the
opposite end
to thwart all attempts and improvement
to keep sentient beings locked in a
crude
suffering state of eternity only the
enlightenment
hundreds of thousands of years later and
after who knows how many full starts
may at last have made it practical to
escape
from that eternity into infinity
that's the end of the chapter wow what a
great way to to end it so
yes our ancestors our ape ancestors
the hominoid ancestors for hundreds of
thousands of years perhaps millions
perhaps millions for the overwhelming
majority of human history
when we lived in tribes in the african
savannah when we
um traveled you know up through asia
eventually got into
to europe etc we weren't
making profound improvements you know
the prehistoric people
were stuck in this static society even
though they had the capacity for
creativity the creativity
was being used for nothing other than
maintaining the status quo
what a hideous practical joke as david
says there
remarkably somehow we we we escaped that
i don't know what's more astonishing the
fact that
we evolved creativity at all that we
evolved creativity
and it was used to maintain stasis in
our society
or is it more remarkable than either of
those things that we actually escaped
that the creativity
eventually enabled us
to criticize to actually build
a critical tradition so that we could
have a means by which to improve
rapidly the
ideas that we had and then of course we
get into you know beyond beyond that
because
the sort of the the the the ability to
improve
certainly kind of began certainly began
um
you know uh long before the the
enlightenment you know
well the ability was always there but
there were improvements happening
slowly but clearly the roman empire
was not like an ancient prehistoric
tribe
a lot of improvements that happened but
they were not precisely a dynamic
society
not what we would call a dynamic society
the
the roman empire from you know for a
long time there just remained the same
and clearly was not generating an
open-ended stream of
innovative knowledge because the roman
empire fell apart
it wasn't able to solve its problems in
time
thus far we have been able to we the
inheritors of the enlightenment
tradition
have been able to solve the problems so
far at a rate faster than what they are
coming at us and we should be we should
be optimistic that this will continue
it's not necessary that it continues
there could be a problem that could
wipe out civilization but
at the moment so long as we maintain
this tradition of criticizing
everything in a pan-optical way
in all directions because criticizing
everything not not keeping anything off
limits
except one thing except one thing as
david deutch points out
that tradition itself we don't want to
undermine the
means of correcting errors we don't want
to destroy that do not destroy the means
of creating errors
or in other words do not undermine these
traditions of criticism
and in our western enlightenment
tradition
what that largely means is ensuring that
the institutions
that hitherto continue to provide the
framework in which
this open-ended stream of innovation can
continue to happen
to ensure those institutions remain
strong and we don't undermine them and
we don't remove them
all together because we don't know
exactly
how what the reasons are
that our society has remained so stable
we can go a good way to explaining why
it is that it's able to
make rapid progress makes rapid progress
because of this tradition
of criticism but why the entire society
shouldn't fall apart
given that it's criticizing everything
all the time well that's harder
and so then we have these political
institutions and traditions
which are doing well at keeping things
stable some are better than others
that's another topic so for now this has
been episode
5050 i don't know when the
the next episode will be coming out i've
put out quite a few recently
but i look forward to to some new
episodes
for now until next time
[Music]
you